docs/index.md, before:

# Gthulhu & SCX GoLand Core

Welcome to the official documentation for **Gthulhu** and **SCX GoLand Core** - advanced Linux schedulers designed to optimize cloud-native workloads using the Linux Scheduler Extension (sched_ext) framework.

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-rocket-launch-outline: **High Performance**

    ---

    Microsecond-level scheduling latency and intelligent task prioritization for modern applications

-   :material-cloud-outline: **Cloud Native**

    ---

    Optimized for containerized environments, microservices, and distributed workloads

-   :material-cpu-64-bit: **Topology Aware**

    ---

    CPU cache hierarchy and NUMA awareness for optimal performance on modern hardware

-   :material-puzzle-outline: **Extensible**

    ---

    User-space scheduler framework allowing custom scheduling policies

</div>

## Overview

![Gthulhu Logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/main/assets/logo.png){ width="300" }

Gthulhu optimizes cloud-native workloads using the Linux Scheduler Extension for different application scenarios. The scheduler consists of two main components:

1. **BPF Component**: Implements low-level sched-ext functionalities in kernel space
2. **Go Component**: User-space scheduler implementing actual scheduling policies with [scx_goland_core](https://github.com/Gthulhu/scx_goland_core)

## Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    A[User Applications] --> B[Linux Kernel]
    B --> C[sched_ext Framework]
    C --> D[BPF Scheduler Program]
    D --> E[User Space Scheduler]
    E --> F[Go Scheduling Logic]
    F --> G[SCX GoLand Core]
    
    subgraph "Kernel Space"
        B
        C
        D
    end
    
    subgraph "User Space"
        E
        F
        G
    end
```

## Key Features

### 🚀 Performance Optimizations

- **Virtual Runtime (vruntime) Based Scheduling**: Fair scheduling with low latency
- **Latency-Sensitive Task Prioritization**: Automatic detection and prioritization of interactive workloads
- **Dynamic Time Slice Adjustment**: Adaptive time slice allocation based on workload characteristics
- **CPU Topology Aware Task Placement**: Cache-aware task assignment for optimal performance
- **Automatic Idle CPU Selection**: Intelligent CPU selection algorithms

### ☁️ Cloud-Native Features

- **Container Awareness**: Understanding of container boundaries and resource limits
- **Microservice Optimization**: Reduced inter-service communication latency
- **Elastic Scaling Support**: Dynamic resource allocation capabilities
- **Multi-Tenant Isolation**: Fair resource sharing between different tenants

### 🔧 Developer-Friendly

- **User-Space Extensibility**: Custom scheduling policies without kernel modifications
- **Rich Debugging Tools**: Comprehensive monitoring and debugging capabilities
- **Complete Documentation**: From beginner to advanced developer guides
- **Active Community**: Open and welcoming developer community

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel 6.12+ with sched_ext support
- Go 1.22+
- LLVM/Clang 17+
- libbpf

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu.git
cd Gthulhu

# Set up dependencies
make dep
git submodule init && git submodule update

# Build the scheduler
make build

# Run the scheduler (requires root)
sudo ./main
```

### Docker Quick Start

```bash
# Build Docker image
make image

# Run in container
docker run --privileged=true --pid host --rm gthulhu:latest /gthulhu/main
```

## Use Cases

### 🎮 Interactive Applications

Perfect for applications requiring low latency and smooth user experience:

- Desktop environments
- Gaming applications  
- Real-time multimedia
- Video conferencing

### 🏢 Enterprise Workloads

Optimized for business-critical applications:

- Web servers and APIs
- Database systems
- Application servers
- Batch processing

### 🔬 High-Performance Computing

Designed for compute-intensive workloads:

- Scientific computing
- Data analytics
- Machine learning training
- Simulation workloads

## Performance Benchmarks

| Metric | Target | Current Status | vs CFS |
|--------|--------|----------------|--------|
| Scheduling Latency | < 10μs | Testing | ~50μs |
| Context Switch Time | < 2μs | Optimizing | ~3μs |
| CPU Utilization | > 95% | 85% | 80% |
| Memory Overhead | < 1MB | 0.5MB | 0.3MB |
| Throughput Improvement | > 15% | 10% | Baseline |

## System Requirements

### Minimum Requirements

- **OS**: Linux with kernel 6.12+
- **Architecture**: x86_64
- **Memory**: 2GB RAM
- **Storage**: 1GB available space

### Supported Distributions

- Ubuntu 24.04+
- Fedora 39+
- Arch Linux (latest)
- CentOS/RHEL 9+ (planned)

## Community

### Get Involved

- 💬 **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/discussions)
- 🐛 **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/issues)
- 📧 **Contact**: [Project Maintainers](mailto:maintainers@gthulhu.dev)

### Contributing

We welcome contributions! See our [Contributing Guide](contributing.en.md) to get started.

### License

This software is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2.

---

!!! tip "Getting Started"
    New to Gthulhu? Start with our [Installation Guide](installation.en.md) and learn [How It Works](how-it-works.en.md).

!!! info "Need Help?"
    Check our [FAQ](faq.en.md) for common questions or create an issue on GitHub.

Commit message:

chore: added dev history page

docs/index.md, after:

# Gthulhu & SCX GoLand Core

Welcome to the official documentation for **Gthulhu** and **SCX GoLand Core** - advanced Linux schedulers designed to optimize cloud-native workloads using the Linux Scheduler Extension (sched_ext) framework.

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   :material-rocket-launch-outline: **High Performance**

    ---

    Microsecond-level scheduling latency and intelligent task prioritization for modern applications

-   :material-cloud-outline: **Cloud Native**

    ---

    Optimized for containerized environments, microservices, and distributed workloads

-   :material-cpu-64-bit: **Topology Aware**

    ---

    CPU cache hierarchy and NUMA awareness for optimal performance on modern hardware

-   :material-puzzle-outline: **Extensible**

    ---

    User-space scheduler framework allowing custom scheduling policies

</div>

## Overview

![Gthulhu Logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/main/assets/logo.png){ width="300" }

Gthulhu optimizes cloud-native workloads using the Linux Scheduler Extension for different application scenarios. The scheduler consists of two main components:

1. **BPF Component**: Implements low-level sched-ext functionalities in kernel space
2. **Go Component**: User-space scheduler implementing actual scheduling policies with [scx_goland_core](https://github.com/Gthulhu/scx_goland_core)

## Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    A[User Applications] --> B[Linux Kernel]
    B --> C[sched_ext Framework]
    C --> D[BPF Scheduler Program]
    D --> E[User Space Scheduler]
    E --> F[Go Scheduling Logic]
    F --> G[SCX GoLand Core]
    
    subgraph "Kernel Space"
        B
        C
        D
    end
    
    subgraph "User Space"
        E
        F
        G
    end
```

## Key Features

### 🚀 Performance Optimizations

- **Virtual Runtime (vruntime) Based Scheduling**: Fair scheduling with low latency
- **Latency-Sensitive Task Prioritization**: Automatic detection and prioritization of interactive workloads
- **Dynamic Time Slice Adjustment**: Adaptive time slice allocation based on workload characteristics
- **CPU Topology Aware Task Placement**: Cache-aware task assignment for optimal performance
- **Automatic Idle CPU Selection**: Intelligent CPU selection algorithms

### ☁️ Cloud-Native Features

- **Container Awareness**: Understanding of container boundaries and resource limits
- **Microservice Optimization**: Reduced inter-service communication latency
- **Elastic Scaling Support**: Dynamic resource allocation capabilities
- **Multi-Tenant Isolation**: Fair resource sharing between different tenants

### 🔧 Developer-Friendly

- **User-Space Extensibility**: Custom scheduling policies without kernel modifications
- **Rich Debugging Tools**: Comprehensive monitoring and debugging capabilities
- **Complete Documentation**: From beginner to advanced developer guides
- **Active Community**: Open and welcoming developer community

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel 6.12+ with sched_ext support
- Go 1.22+
- LLVM/Clang 17+
- libbpf

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu.git
cd Gthulhu

# Set up dependencies
make dep
git submodule init && git submodule update

# Build the scheduler
make build

# Run the scheduler (requires root)
sudo ./main
```

### Docker Quick Start

```bash
# Build Docker image
make image

# Run in container
docker run --privileged=true --pid host --rm gthulhu:latest /gthulhu/main
```

## Use Cases

### 🎮 Interactive Applications

Perfect for applications requiring low latency and smooth user experience:

- Desktop environments
- Gaming applications  
- Real-time multimedia
- Video conferencing

### 🏢 Enterprise Workloads

Optimized for business-critical applications:

- Web servers and APIs
- Database systems
- Application servers
- Batch processing

### 🔬 High-Performance Computing

Designed for compute-intensive workloads:

- Scientific computing
- Data analytics
- Machine learning training
- Simulation workloads

## Performance Benchmarks

| Metric | Target | Current Status | vs CFS |
|--------|--------|----------------|--------|
| Scheduling Latency | < 10μs | Testing | ~50μs |
| Context Switch Time | < 2μs | Optimizing | ~3μs |
| CPU Utilization | > 95% | 85% | 80% |
| Memory Overhead | < 1MB | 0.5MB | 0.3MB |
| Throughput Improvement | > 15% | 10% | Baseline |

## System Requirements

### Minimum Requirements

- **OS**: Linux with kernel 6.12+
- **Architecture**: x86_64
- **Memory**: 2GB RAM
- **Storage**: 1GB available space

### Supported Distributions

- Ubuntu 24.04+
- Fedora 39+
- Arch Linux (latest)
- CentOS/RHEL 9+ (planned)

## Community

### Get Involved

- 💬 **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/discussions)
- 🐛 **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Gthulhu/Gthulhu/issues)
- 📧 **Contact**: [Project Maintainers](mailto:maintainers@gthulhu.dev)

### Contributing

We welcome contributions! See our [Contributing Guide](contributing.en.md) to get started.

### License

This software is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2.

---

!!! tip "Getting Started"
    New to Gthulhu? Start with our [Installation Guide](installation.en.md) and learn [How It Works](how-it-works.en.md).

!!! info "Learn More"
    Explore the [Development History](development-history.en.md) to understand technical challenges and solutions.

!!! info "Need Help?"
    Check our [FAQ](faq.en.md) for common questions or create an issue on GitHub.
